---
layout: post
title:  "TripWire for beginners"
date:   2023-05-14 05:28:23 -0500
author: Nick
categories: ['Miscellaneous Tools']
background: '/images/Home page Background.jpg'
---
----
## TripWire for beginners

Tripwire is a tool that scans your device and lets you know when any unplanned changes happen.

 When you first install the program, you make a system configuration file, which tells Tripwire what directories you want
 to scan for changes. You must comment out certain directories that do not exist on your system to avoid errors.
 Then, you Must initialize tripwire with will give it a baseline scan.

To check your system for changes against the initial scan, do `tripwire --check`
 this will show you what files and directories have been modified. 

## Why Tripwire

Tripwire is a very useful tool in CCDC as you are constantly having to monitor your system to make sure you have not
Been compromised by the red team. With tripwire, you can set up the configurations to what normal system looks
Like.
 
Reports from tripwire make it easy to see all the activity that has happened since your initial scan. You can see the exact
File that was changed along with its path. This makes it easy to tell if an attacker has access in your system and
Clues of how they got there, so you can try to block access.

## Uses of Tripwire
Tripwire is not meant to prevent attackers from accessing your network, it is merely just a monitoring software.

Tripwire is meant to be configured with a baseline of what a healthy system looks like, and it lets you know what has
Changed from that baseline. It is a great tool to let you know what changes have been made to your device.

## Requirements
A Linux distro is required for tripwire to work, I  will be using Ubuntu in my example, but it is simple to follow the same
steps in other distros because it  uses the shell.

## Tripwire Installation and usage Video
When installing Tripwire, you must make sure you comment out the directories you do not need, or else it will give you Errors. You must then update the configuration file.

<iframe width="640" height="480" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/G1QoAgxdYX4" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen ></iframe>

## Additional Resources

- [Alibaba cloud post referenced in the video](https://www.alibabacloud.com/blog/how-to-install-and-configure-tripwire-ids-on-ubuntu-16-04_594498)

- [Another tutorial using Debian that I found useful](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PI3Bj65-TOw&ab_channel=seanmancini)




