---
layout: post
title:  "Snort for beginners"
date:   2023-08-14 05:28:23 -0500
author: Teona
categories: ['Perimeter Security']
background: '/images/Home page Background.jpg'
---

## Snort for beginners

Snort serves as a network traffic analysis tool, continuously monitoring and scrutinizing data packets flowing through a network. It applies a range of detection techniques to identify and flag potential security threats, such as malicious activities, network attacks, and intrusions.

Snort operates in real-time, providing immediate alerts and responses to security incidents. When a potential threat is detected, it can generate alerts, log events, and even take proactive measures to prevent further exploitation or damage. One of the key strengths of Snort is its flexible rule-based engine, which enables the system to detect a broad spectrum of network-based threats. Snort utilizes a combination of signature-based detection, protocol analysis, and anomaly detection to identify patterns and behaviors that indicate potential security breaches.

Snort can be configured in three main modes: 
1. sniffer, 
2. packet logger, and 
3. network intrusion detection.

The purpose of the Snort tool:
- Enterprise Networks: Snort is commonly deployed in enterprise networks to monitor and protect the internal network infrastructure. It helps detect and prevent unauthorized access, malware infections, and other network-based threats targeting corporate systems and data.
- Data Centers: Snort is utilized in data center environments to ensure the security and integrity of critical systems and infrastructure. By monitoring network traffic, Snort can detect and respond to potential security breaches, helping to safeguard valuable data and services.
- Internet Service Providers (ISPs): ISPs often employ Snort to monitor network traffic across their infrastructure. This allows them to identify and mitigate network-based attacks targeting their customers, such as DDoS attacks, botnet infections, and unauthorized access attempts.
- Security Operations Centers (SOCs): Snort plays a crucial role in SOC environments where security analysts monitor and respond to security incidents. It helps in detecting and investigating potential threats, providing valuable insights into network traffic patterns and anomalous activities.
- Intrusion Detection and Prevention Systems (IDS/IPS): Snort is widely used as a standalone IDS/IPS solution or integrated with other security systems. It helps in detecting and preventing network-based attacks, complementing other security measures like firewalls and antivirus software.
- Research and Education: Snort is a valuable tool in research and educational settings where network security is studied and taught. It allows researchers and students to gain hands-on experience in network security analysis, threat detection, and response.

Uses of snort Tool:
- Identify and respond to security incidents: Snort enables the timely detection of security breaches, such as intrusion attempts, malware infections, and unauthorized access. By generating alerts and logging events, it provides valuable information to security teams, enabling them to take swift action and mitigate risks.
- Safeguard network infrastructure: Snort acts as a frontline defense mechanism for network infrastructure, protecting critical assets and data from unauthorized access, data breaches, and service disruptions. It helps organizations maintain the integrity and availability of their networks.
- Enhance overall security posture: Snort contributes to an organization's comprehensive security strategy by complementing other security measures, such as firewalls, antivirus software, and access controls. It adds an additional layer of defense by focusing specifically on detecting and preventing network-based threats.
- Adapt to evolving threats: Snort's open-source nature has allowed for continuous community collaboration and the development of new rulesets and plugins. This adaptability ensures that Snort can keep up with emerging threats and evolving attack techniques, making it a valuable asset for organizations striving to stay ahead of potential risks.
- Network Visibility and Forensics: Snort provides detailed logging capabilities, allowing security analysts to investigate and analyze network traffic data. The logged information can be used for forensic analysis, threat hunting, and identifying potential security weaknesses in the network.
- Intrusion Detection: Snort detects various types of network-based attacks, including but not limited to port scans, denial-of-service (DoS) attacks, SQL injections, buffer overflows, and malware infections. It uses a combination of signature-based detection, protocol analysis, and anomaly detection techniques to identify patterns and behaviors indicative of these attacks.

## Requirements to Install snort and use snort
- Operating System – Windows, MacOS, Linux
- Command-Line Interface (CLI)
- Network Infrastructure: Snort needs access to the network traffic that you want to monitor. This can be achieved by deploying Snort on a network segment, connecting it to a network switch in a mirroring or promiscuous mode, or configuring network taps or span ports to capture the desired traffic.
- Hardware/Server: Snort can be installed on a dedicated server, or a hardware appliance specifically designed for intrusion detection and prevention.
- Software Dependencies: Snort has dependencies on other software components to function correctly. These include a packet capture library (such as libpcap or WinPcap) for capturing network packets, a database system (such as MySQL or PostgreSQL) for storing event data, and other supporting libraries and utilities.
- Rule Management: Snort relies on rule sets to detect and classify various types of network-based threats.
- Logging and Analysis: Snort generates alerts and log files containing information about detected events.
- Ongoing Maintenance and Updates: To ensure the effectiveness of Snort, regular updates of rulesets, software patches, and system configurations are required.

## Installation Process

#### For Windows

1. Visit the Snort website at [https://www.snort.org/](https://www.snort.org/) and navigate to the Downloads section.
2. Download the Snort installer package for Windows.
3. Run the installer package and follow the on-screen instructions to install Snort.
4. During the installation, you will be prompted to choose the installation directory, configuration options, and ruleset.
5. Once the installation is complete, Snort will be ready to use on Windows.

#### For MacOs

1. Open the Terminal application on your macOS system.
2. Snort is typically pre-installed on macOS, but if it is not installed, you can install it using the package manager Homebrew. Install Homebrew by following the instructions at [https://brew.sh/](https://brew.sh/).
3. Once Homebrew is installed, open Terminal and run the following command to install Snort:
   - `brew install snort`
4. To check if the installation was successful run the command: snort --version

#### For Linux

- Debian-based distributions 
	1. In Ubuntu Terminal run the following command to update the package list: `sudo apt update`
	2. Run the following command to install snort: `sudo apt install snort`
	3. To check if the installation was successful run the command: `snort --version`
	
 - Red Hat-based distributions
	1. In Ubuntu Terminal run the following command to update the package list: `sudo yum update`
	2. Run the following command to install snort: `sudo yum install snort`
	3. To check if the installation was successful run the command: `snort --version`

## Snort Installation and Usage Video

<iframe src="https://drive.google.com/file/d/10Vi-ZK_L9WUZvoQIEafbCbpRwBtSMWjR/preview" width="640" height="480" allow="autoplay"></iframe>

## Additional Resources

- [Intrusion Detection With Snort – YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Gh0sweT-G30)
- [Introduction To Snort IDS - YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RzF5-fVz7Oc&t=53s)
