---
layout: post
title:  "DIG for beginners"
date:   2023-08-14 05:28:23 -0500
author: Teona
categories: ['DNS Utilities']
background: '/images/Home page Background.jpg'
---

## DIG for beginners

Dig is a network administration command-line tool for querying the Domain Name System (DNS), and it allows users to retrieve information about domain names and their associated DNS records. It supports various types of DNS queries, including retrieving IP addresses, mail server information, canonical names, and text information.

Dig provides options for querying specific DNS record types, displaying additional information such as query time and response flags, and formatting the output according to user preferences. Dig can perform both recursive and non-recursive queries, and it supports DNSSEC for cryptographic verification of DNS responses.

## The purpose of the DIG tool
- DNS Information Retrieval: Dig allows users to retrieve various types of DNS information, such as IP addresses, mail server information, and other DNS records associated with a domain name. It provides a straightforward way to query DNS servers and obtain the desired information quickly.
- Troubleshooting Network Issues: By querying DNS servers and analyzing the responses, administrators can identify and resolve problems related to DNS configuration, DNS resolution, or incorrect DNS records.
- DNS Record Verification: Dig supports DNSSEC (DNS Security Extensions), which provides cryptographic verification of DNS responses, therefore users can verify the authenticity and integrity of DNS records, ensuring that the responses are not tampered with during transit.
- Network Testing and Monitoring: Dig is often used in network testing and monitoring scenarios, which allows users to check DNS server response times, verify the availability of specific DNS records, and monitor changes in DNS configurations over time.
- DNS Administration: For DNS administrators, Dig provides a powerful command-line interface for managing DNS infrastructure, which allows administrators to perform DNS queries programmatically, automate DNS-related tasks, and integrate Dig into scripts or other tools.

## Uses of the DIG Tool
- Query Types: Dig supports various types of DNS queries, including retrieving A (IP address), MX (mail server), CNAME (canonical name), TXT (text), NS (name server), and other types of DNS records associated with a domain name.
- Name Server Lookup: It allows users to specify the DNS server they want to query, providing flexibility in checking responses from specific DNS servers.
- Recursive and Non-Recursive Queries: Recursive queries request the DNS server to provide a complete answer, while non-recursive queries request the server to provide the best answer it has available, even if it requires further queries.
- DNSSEC Support: Dig supports DNS Security Extensions (DNSSEC), enabling the verification of DNS responses for authenticity and integrity, thereby enhancing security.
- Specific DNS Record Queries: Users can specify the type of DNS record they want to retrieve using the "+type" option, which allows for targeted queries, retrieving only the desired DNS records.
- Additional Information: Dig provides additional information along with DNS responses, such as query time, query ID, response size, and flags. This information can be useful for troubleshooting and analysis purposes.
- Output Formatting: Dig offers options for formatting the output to suit user preferences. It allows customization of the display style and verbosity of the results.
- IPv6 Support: Dig supports IPv6 and can query both IPv4 and IPv6 DNS servers, making it compatible with modern networking environments.
- Automation and Scripting: Dig can be incorporated into scripts and 
    automated processes, enabling users to perform batch queries,
    automate DNS-related tasks and integrate Dig into larger workflows.

## Requirements for Installation and usage of DIG

- Operating System – Windows, MacOS, Linux
- Command-Line Interface (CLI)
- DNS Server Access: This can be either your organization's DNS servers or public DNS servers provided by your internet service provider (ISP) or third-party DNS providers.
- Network Connectivity: Ensure that your system has an active internet connection to reach the DNS servers, because without it, Dig won't be able to communicate with the DNS servers.
- DNS Resolution Configuration: In some cases, you may need to configure your system's DNS resolution settings to ensure that Dig uses the correct DNS servers for querying. This configuration can be done through network settings or DNS configuration files on your operating system.
- Proper Syntax and Usage: Familiarize yourself with the syntax and usage of the Dig commands to effectively query DNS servers and retrieve the desired information. Understanding the available options and their respective meanings will help you utilize Dig to its full potential.

## Installation Process
#### For Windows
 - Download the BIND software package from the Internet Systems Consortium (ISC) website. You can find it at [https://www.isc.org/bind/](https://www.isc.org/bind/).
- Choose the appropriate version for your Windows system (32-bit or 64-bit) and download the installer package.
-  Run the installer package and follow the on-screen instructions to complete the installation. Make sure to select the option to install the Dig utility during the installation process.
-  After installation, open the Command Prompt or PowerShell on your Windows system.
- Verify the installation by typing "dig" in the command line. If Dig is installed
    correctly, you should see the Dig command and usage information.

#### For MacOS
- Open the Terminal application on your macOS system.
- Dig is typically pre-installed on macOS. To check if Dig is already installed, type dig in the Terminal and press Enter.
- If Dig is not installed, you can install it using the package manager Homebrew. Install Homebrew by following the instructions at [https://brew.sh/](https://brew.sh/).
- Once Homebrew is installed, open Terminal and run the following command to install Dig:       `brew install bind`
- To check if the installation was successful run the command: `dig -v`

#### For Linux

 - Debian-based distributions 
	1. In Ubuntu Terminal run the following command to update the package list: sudo apt update
	2. Run the following command to install dig: sudo apt install dnsutils
	3. To check if the installation was successful run the command: `dig –v`
	
 - Red Hat-based distributions
	1. In Ubuntu Terminal run the following command to update the package list: `sudo yum update`
	2. Run the following command to install dig: `sudo yum install bind-utils`
	3. To check if the installation was successful run the command: `dig -v`


## DIG Installation and Usage video

<iframe src="https://drive.google.com/file/d/1nVNNwnn4Xna7U9lStwhyLM904fJWdmcP/preview" width="640" height="480" allow="autoplay"></iframe>

## Links for more dig tutorials:
- [Using the dig command to troubleshoot and solve DNS problems – YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hYZY75xMjlY)
- [DNS Enumeration Tutorial - Dig, Nslookup & Host – YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rQ-dc5kwRtU)
- [How To Lookup DNS Records With The dig Command - YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iESSCDnC74k)


